Let's talk a little bit about
the web app lifecycle, okay?
Things that sometimes we don't think
about when we are web developers.
So let's talk about some possibilities.
The user goes to a new tab.
So, my tab is not on the screen anymore.
User goes to a new window.
Can be a browser window or
another window from the OS.
The user minimizes the window.
It can be also PWA, by the way,
not just the browser.
It can be an installed PWA window,
so the user minimizes the window,
the user closes the window with the X or
with the red button, it depends on the OS.
The users closes the browser or
the PWA standalone window.
So all these are different
situations that might impact
what happens with our JavaScript code.
Before actually getting into
the answer of what's going on,
I have a question for you.
What happens on mobile operating systems
with app's lifecycle in general?
So on Android, on iOS,
do you have a close button?
Have you ever seen an app with
an exit menu or a close app menu?
No, so
it's like technically we never close apps.
As web developer, typically we
don't think too much about that.
And what happens with that?
So let me get out of the presentation for
a second.
And I have here an iOS simulator.
And I wanna show you something.
Here, let me decrease the size
a little bit, like so.
So, how many of you on iOS or Android are
actually doing this many times per day?
Like closing your app,
swiping up or swiping right.
So I have here a couple of yeses,
and a couple of no.
And for those of you saying yes,
why are you doing it?
>> Clear the clutter.
What else?
And why?
Why do you care about that?
>> If I'm switching between app contexts,
I like to have fewer things in front of-
>> Okay, or it's a mental organization.
Cool, what else?
>> I don't close them but there is people
say that it helps battery life but
it doesn't actually.
>> It saves battery life.
Yeah, there are other people thinking
that it will save battery life and
it's not true,
it's exactly the opposite of that.
And that has to do with the life cycle of
a mobile operating system with their apps.
And our web apps are actually
within that lifecycle.
They can be a tab in the browser or
they can be any standalone PWA.
It doesn't matter.
It's actually the same.
We are actually within that OS.
So let's try to understand how that works.
So, going back here, on a desktop
operating system, it can be Linux,
Windows, Mac OS, Chrome OS,
typically when you are inside one app, so
that's the orange one.
That's your app that is running,
but you may have others.
So that's the active app.
The orange one is the active app.
So you may have other apps
that are also running.
And they're all running,
even if they are in the background or
minimized or hidden somehow.
If you press out tab, you change your
active app, but your previous app,
it's obviously running.
it's in the background but running, that's
the next step operating system in general.
When mobile appeared, we as users, we
thought that was the case also for mobile.
And that's why a lot of people
are actually closing apps because they
think that they're consuming resources.
But that's not how they typically work.
On mobile operating systems this is
a general idea, there are some exceptions
but in general, you have one app
that is running, the active app.
And the other apps that you
see in the multitask manager,
are paused or suspended,
different names to this.
So they're not executing code.
And what you see in that Multitask
manager is just screenshots of that app,
not really like the current UI for
the app, it's a screenshot.
If you change your app, now you
have another app that is active and
your previous app goes to suspended mode.
And there is no close, so
users don't close apps.
So of course, this model has a problem,
the memory is limited and
we can't keep 100 apps open forever.
So at one point the OS will need more
memory for the current active app and
it will actually kill some
of the background apps.
That process has different names,
it depends on the OS, but
it's actually pretty
similar on Android and iOS.
On Android, it's a little bit more complex
because we don't have just the concept of
the app,
we also have the concepts of an activity.
But we are not going to get so
deep on that today.
But anyway,
if the OS is actually killing your app, or
destroying your app,
or disposing your app,
your app, it still appears as there.
So it's not removing
the app from the list.
You still see the screenshot.
Because on mobile operating
system task managers,
what you see is actually some
kind of navigation history.
It's not really a task
manager like in the OS tab.
It's not the same.
So having that in mind,
now going back to web apps and
JavaScript, we can be on
any of these situations.
So our content can be actually
in memory and running.
Our content can be actually in memory and
not running.
That's the paused state on that diagram,
or our content cannot be in memory at all.
But for the user, it's still there.
We see the screenshot so the user thinks
that the content is still there, but
it's not.
So, when we are doing web apps or
websites in the browser,
or when doing PWAs,
we are going to see this in action.
And we should care about this, again,
to improve the user experience.
Because what happens when
the user goes back to our PWA or
web app that was actually disposed?
The app will start from scratch.
But the user was expecting something
different because the screenshot was
showing us something different.
So that's why we need to understand
the situation and do something about that.